Constana (Romanian pronunciation: [konstantsa]), historically known as Tomis (Greek:  or , Konstantia, Bulgarian:  or , Turkish: Kstence), is the oldest still-populated city in Romania. It was founded around 600 BC. The city is located in the Dobruja region of Romania, on the Black Sea coast. It is the capital of Constana County and the largest city in the region.
Constana is the fifth most populous city in Romania. The Constana metropolitan area includes 14 localities within 30 km (19 mi) of the city, and, with 425,916 inhabitants, it is the second largest metropolitan area in Romania.
The Port of Constana has an area of 39.26 km2 (15.16 sq mi) and a length of about 30 km (19 mi). It is the largest port on the Black Sea, and one of the largest ports in Europe.


== History ==

Tomis (also called Tomi) was a Greek colony in the province of Scythia Minor on the Black Sea shore, founded around 600 BC for commercial exchanges with the local Getic populations. The name may likely be derived from Greek  meaning cutpiece, section.
According to one myth dating from Antiquity, found in the Bibliotheca, it was founded by Aeetes:
"When Aeetes discovered the daring deeds done by Medea, he started off in pursuit of the ship; but when she saw him near, Medea murdered her brother and cutting him limb from limb threw the pieces into the deep. Gathering the child's limbs, Aeetes fell behind in the pursuit; wherefore he turned back, and, having buried the rescued limbs of his child, he called the place Tomi."
Another legend is recorded by Jordanes (after Cassiodorus), who ascribes the foundation of the city to a Getae queen (The origin and deeds of the Goths):
"After achieving this victory (against Cyrus the Great) and winning so much booty from her enemies, Queen Tomyris crossed over into that part of Moesia which is now called Lesser Scythia - a name borrowed from Great Scythia -, and built on the Moesian shore of the Black Sea the city of Tomi, named after herself."
In 29 BC the Romans captured the region from the Odryses, and annexed it as far as the Danube, under the name of Limes Scythicus.
In AD 8, the Roman poet Ovid (43 BC-17) was banished here by Augustus, where he found his death eight years later. He laments his exile in Tomis in his poems: Tristia and Epistulae ex Ponto. Tomis was "by his account a town located in a war-stricken cultural wasteland on the remotest margins of the empire".

A statue of Ovid stands in the Ovid Square (Piaa Ovidiu) of Constana, in front of the History Museum (the former City Hall).
A number of inscriptions found in the city and its vicinity show that Constana lies where Tomis once stood. The city was afterwards included in the Province of Moesia, and, from the time of Diocletian, in Scythia Minor, of which it was the metropolis. After the 5th century, Tomis fell under the rule of the Eastern Roman Empire. During Maurice's Balkan campaigns, Tomis was besieged by the Avars in the winter of 597/598.
Tomis was later renamed to Constantiana in honour of Constantia, the half-sister of Roman Emperor Constantine the Great (274-337). The earliest known usage of this name was "" ("Constantia") in 950. The city lay at the seaward end of the Great Wall of Trajan, and has evidently been surrounded by fortifications of its own. After successively becoming part of the Bulgarian Empire for over 500 years, and later of the independent principality of Dobrotitsa/Dobrotici and of Wallachia under Mircea I of Wallachia, Constana fell under the Ottoman rule around 1419.
A railroad linking Constana to Cernavod was opened in 1860. In spite of damage done by railway contractors there are considerable remains of ancient masonry walls, pillars, etc. An impressive public building, thought to have originally been a port building, has been excavated, and contains the substantial remains of one of the longest mosaic pavements in the world.
In 1878, after the Romanian War of Independence, Constana and the rest of Northern Dobruja were ceded by the Ottoman Empire to Romania. The city became Romania's main seaport and transit point for much of Romania's exports.
On October 22, 1916 (during World War I), the Central Powers (German, Turkish and Bulgarian troops) occupied Constana. According to the Treaty of Bucharest in May 1918, article 10.b (a treaty never ratified by Romania), Constana remained under the joint control of the Central Powers. Allied troops liberated the city in 1918 after the successful offensive on the Thessaloniki front knocked Bulgaria out of the war.
In the interwar years, the city became Romania's main commercial hub, so that by the 1930s over half of the national exports were going through the port. During World War II, when Romania joined the Axis powers, Constana was one of the country's main targets for the Allied bombers. While the town was left relatively undamaged, the port suffered extensive damage, recovering only in the early 1950s.


== Geography ==

Constana is the administrative center of the county with the same name and the largest city in the EU Southeastern development region of Romania. The city is located on the Black Sea coast, having a beach length of 13 kilometres (8 miles). Mamaia, an administrative district of Constana, is the largest and most modern resort on the Romanian coast. Mineral springs in the surrounding area and sea bathing attract many visitors in the summer.


== Climate ==
Constana is one of the warmest cities in Romania. It has a moderate subtropical climate with considerable maritime and some continental influences. There are four distinct seasons during the year.
Summer (late May to mid September) is warm, dry and sunny with a July and August average of 23 C (73 F). The beginning of summer brings plenty of precipitation, but by early July the weather becomes settled and dry. Most summer days see a gentle breeze refreshing the daytime temperatures. Nights are warm and somewhat muggy because of the heat stored by the sea.
Autumn starts in mid or late September with warm and sunny days. September can be warmer than June, owing to the heat accumulated by the Black Sea. The first frost occurs on average in mid November.
Winter is much balmier compared to other cities in southern Romania. Snow is not abundant but the weather can be very windy and unpleasant. Winter arrives much later than in the interior and December weather is often mild with high temperatures reaching 8 C (46 F) - 12 C (54 F). Average January temperature is 1 C (34 F). Winter storms when the sea becomes particularly treacherous are a common occurrence between December and March.
Spring arrives early but it's quite cool. Often in April and May the Black Sea coast is one of the coolest places in Romania found at an altitude lower than 500 m (1,640.42 ft).
4 of the warmest 7 years since 1889 occurred after the year 2000 (2000, 2001, 2007 and 2008). The winter and the summer of 2007 were respectively the warmest and the second warmest in recorded history with monthly averages for January (+6.5C) and June (+23.0C) breaking all-time records. Overall 2007 was the warmest year since 1889 when weather recording began.


== Demographics ==
According to the 2002 Romanian census, there were 310,471 people living within the city of Constana, making it the fifth most populous city in Romania.
As of 2011, 283,872 inhabitants live within the city limits, a decrease from the figure recorded at the 2002 census.
After Bucharest, the capital city, Romania has a number of major cities that are roughly equal in size: Constana, Iai, Cluj-Napoca and Timioara.
The metropolitan area of Constana has a permanent population of 387,593 inhabitants, i.e. 61% of the total population of the county, and a minimum average of 120,000 per day, tourists or seasonal workers, transient people during the high tourist season.


== Economy ==

As of 1878, Constana was defined as a "poor Turkish fishing village." As of 1920, it was called "flourishing," and was known for exporting oil and cereals.
Constana is one of Romania's main industrial, commercial and tourist centers. During the first half of 2008, some 3,144 new companies were established in Constana and its neighbouring localities, a number surpassed only in Bucharest and Cluj County. The Port of Constana is the largest on the Black Sea and the fourth largest in Europe. The city also boasts a comparably large shipyard.
Tourism has been an increasingly important economic activity in recent years. Although Constana has been promoted as a seaside resort since the time of Carol I, the development of naval industry had a detrimental effect on the city's beaches. Nevertheless, due to its proximity to other major tourist destinations, Constana receives a significant number of visitors every year, who discover and visit the city's monuments and attractions. Also, Constana is a centre of commerce and education, both of which significantly contribute to the local economy.


== Transport ==

The opening, in 1895, of the railway to Bucharest, which crosses the Danube by a bridge at Cernavod, brought Constana a considerable transit trade in grain and petroleum, which are largely exported; coal and coke head the list of imports, followed by machinery, iron goods, and cotton and woollen fabrics.
The A2 motorway provides a rapid road link between Constana and Bucharest, while the A4 motorway acts as the city's outer traffic ring, diverting heavy traffic to and from the city port and to Mangalia.
The city is served by the Mihail Koglniceanu International Airport.

Port of Constana includes Constana North Port and Constana South Port, is the 4th largest in Europe and is protected by breakwaters, with a lighthouse at the entrance, is well defended from the North winds, but those from the South, South-East, and South-West prove sometimes highly dangerous. The Black Sea squadron of the Romanian fleet is stationed here. A large canal (the Danube-Black Sea Canal) connects the Danube River to the Black Sea at Constana.
Constana's public transport system is run by Regia Autonom de Transport n Comun Constana (RATC), and consists of 23 all year round bus lines, and 1 summer tourist sightseeing double decker open roof bus line. In the early 2000s, the city bought 130 new MAZ buses, replacing the aging DAC buses. All of its bus fleet is currently made up of buses from the 200-2008 period, which are distinctly painted in bright colors, such as pink, yellow and green. There are also The double decker Volvo buses that run in the summertime provide access to and from the city's resort. As of October 2013 the cost of 1 ticket is 3 RON.Tramway lines were active until the early 2000s. The cars were almost 25 years old and with lack of maintenance they become slow and noisy so the lines were removed. As of July 2009 all the tram lines have been decommissioned and replaced with long-wheelbase buses. Two trolley bus lines were active until the late 2000s - also decommissioned and replaced by buses. There are also plenty lines of private mini buses which run along longer and more intricate lines. The price of a minibus ticket, as of October 2013, varies between 1 and 2 RON depending on operator.


== Tourism ==
Situated at the crossroads of several commercial routes, Constana lies on the western coast of the Black Sea, 185 miles (298 km) from the Bosphorus Strait. An ancient metropolis and Romania's largest sea port, Constana traces its history some 2,500 years. Originally called Tomis, legend has it that Jason landed here with the Argonauts after finding the Golden Fleece.

One of the largest cities in Romania, Constana is now an important cultural and economic center, worth exploring for its archaeological treasures and the atmosphere of the old town center. Its historical monuments, ancient ruins, grand Casino, museums and shops, and proximity to beach resorts make it the focal point of Black Sea coast tourism. Open-air restaurants, nightclubs and cabarets offer a wide variety of entertainment. Regional attractions include traditional villages, vineyards, ancient monuments and the Danube Delta, the best preserved delta in Europe.
"National History and Archaeology Museum" is located in the old City Hall, and has a very large collection of ancient art.


=== Main sights ===

Ovid's Square
Designed by the sculptor Ettore Ferrari in 1887, the statue dedicated to the Roman poet, Publius Ovidius Naso, gives name to this square. Emperor Augustus exiled Ovid to Tomis in 8 AD.
The Roman Mosaics (Edificiul Roman cu Mozaic)
A vast complex on three levels once linked the upper town to the harbor. Today, only about a third of the original edifice remains, including more than 9,150 sq ft (850 m2) of colorful mosaics. Built toward the end of the 4th century AD and developed over the centuries, it was the city's commercial center until the 7th century. Archaeological vestiges point to the existence of workshops, warehouses and shops in the area. Remains of the Roman public baths can still be seen nearby. Aqueducts brought water 6 miles (10 km) to the town.
The Genoese Lighthouse (Farul Genovez)
Soaring 26 feet (7.9 m), this lighthouse was built in 1860 by the Danubius and Black Sea Company to honor Genoese merchants who established a flourishing sea trade community here in the 13th century.
The Casino (Cazinoul)
Completed between the two World Wars in art nouveau style according to the plans of the architects, Daniel Renard and Petre Antonescu, the Casino features sumptuous architecture and a wonderful view of the sea. The pedestrian area around the Casino is a sought-after destination for couples and families, especially at sunset.
The House with Lions (Casa cu Lei)
Blending pre-Romantic and Genovese architectural styles, this late 19th century building features four columns adorned with imposing sculptured lions. During the 1930s, its elegant salons hosted the Constana Masonic Lodge.
The Archeology Park (Parcul Arheologic)
The park houses columns and fragments of 3rd and 4th-century buildings and a 6th-century tower.
St. Peter & Paul Orthodox Cathedral
Constructed in Greco-Roman style between 1883 and 1885, the church was severely damaged during World War II and was restored in 1951. The interior murals display a neo-Byzantine style combined with Romanian elements best observed in the iconostasis and pews, chandeliers and candlesticks (bronze and brass alloy), all designed by Ion Mincu and completed in Paris.
The Great Mahmudiye Mosque (Moscheea Mare Mahmoud II)
Built in 1910 by King Carol I, the mosque is the seat of the Mufti, the spiritual leader of the 55,000 Muslims (Turks and Tatars by origin) who live along the coast of the Dobrogea region. The building combines Byzantine and Romanian architectural elements, making it one of the most distinctive mosques in the area. The centerpiece of the interior is a large Turkish carpet, a gift from Sultan Abdul Hamid. Woven at the Hereke Handicraft Center in Turkey, it is one of the largest carpets in Europe, weighing 1,080 pounds. The main attraction of the mosque is the 164 ft (50 m) minaret (tower) which offers a stunning view of the old downtown and harbor. Five times a day, the muezzin climbs 140 steps to the top of the minaret to call the faithful to prayer.
Hnkar Mosque (Geamia Hunchiar)
The mosque was built between 1867-1868 by Ottoman Sultan Abdlaziz for Turks who were forced to leave Crimea after the Crimean War (185356) and settled in Constanta. The mosque has a 24m high minaret and was subject to a restoration in 1945 and 1992.
The Fantasio Theatre (Teatrul Fantasio)
Built in 1927 by Demostene Tranulis, a local philanthropist of Greek origin, this theatre used to be called Tranulis before 1947, after the name of its benefactor. It's a fine building featuring elements of neoclassical architecture, located in the heart of the city, on Ferdinand Boulevard.


== Neighborhoods ==


== Politics ==
The current mayor of Constana is Radu tefan Mazre (Social Democratic Party).
The Constana Municipal Council, elected in the 2008 local government elections, is made up of 27 councilors, with the following party composition:


== Media ==


== Sports ==
Constana is home to several football clubs, with FC Farul playing in the Romanian second division. There are two rugby teams in Constana: RC Farul Constana, who play in Divizia Naional BRD, and Constructul Cleopatra Constana, who play in Divizia A. One of the top Romanian handball clubs, HCM Constana, is also based in the city. Olympic champion gymnasts Simona Amnar and Ctlina Ponor were born in Constana. The tennis player Simona Halep is also a native of the city.


== International relations ==


=== Twin towns  Sister cities ===
Constana is twinned with:


=== Consulates ===


== Natives of Constana ==


== Education ==
Universities
Mircea cel Btrn Naval Academy
Constana Maritime University
Ovidius University
Andrei aguna University
Tomis University
Dimitrie Cantemir University

High schools
Mircea cel Btrn National College
Constantin Bratescu National College
Mihai Eminescu National College
Electrotechnics and Telecommunication High School
George Clinescu High School
Ovidius High School
Decebal High School
Traian High School
Computer Science International High School
"Nicolae Rotaru" Sports High School
Orthodox Theological Seminary
National College of Arts "Queen Marie"

International Schools
Cambridge School of Constanta (CSC) http://cambridgeconstanta.ro/


== References ==


== Studies ==
Livia Buzoianu and Maria Barbulescu, "Tomis," in Dimitrios V. Grammenos and Elias K. Petropoulos (eds), Ancient Greek Colonies in the Black Sea, Vol. 1 (Oxford, Archaeopress, 2001) (BAR International Series; 1675 (1-2)), 287-336.


== External links ==
Official website
Constana Seaport official site